Name:
F oundations of Machine Learning & Neural Networks Summer 2026
Mini Exam 1
Instructor: Eric
Read the following instructions carefully before starting:
1. The exam is set for a duration of 15 minutes. You are allowed to refer to the one-page cheat
sheet that you have brought with you, but not any other course material. Talking to anyone
other than the course staff regarding the exam is not permitted. We have a zero tolerance
policy on cheating.
2. The exam contains only Short format problems:
• Each short format problem is worth 2 or 3 points for a total of 7 problems worth 16
points total. You can achieve a maximum of 8 points (i.e. solve 3 or 4 questions).
• These problems are intended to test your conceptual understanding of the different
machine learning methods that we have covered in the lectures so far.
• The solutions are intended to be short (e.g. not more than a few words per asked
question).
• You do not need to solve all questions.
3. If you have any questions during the exam, please raise your hand and one of the staff members
will come and address your concerns.
4. Good luck! You’ve got this! :)
Summer 2026 1 of 4
Name:
1 Short format
The solutions to these problems must be written in the space provided . The solutions
are intended to be short.
(a) (2 points) As you increase k in a k-NN classifier from 1 to n (the training set size), how do
you expect (1) training error and (2) test error to change?
(b) (2 points) Suppose you are given a training dataset S ={(x1,y 1),..., (xm,ym)} for a classi-
fication problem, that is, yi∈{± 1} for all i∈ [m]. You run the Perceptron algorithm on this
data. If you observe that it does not terminate, what assumption is not satisfied by the data?
Summer 2026 2 of 4
Name:
(c) (3 points) Consider the Exponential distribution, which is a continuous distribution over
positive reals with a probability density function of p(x;λ) = λe−λx for x > 0. Suppose
you observe the sequence {x1,x 2,x 3} ={2, 4, 6}. What is the maximum likelihood estimate
(MLE) for the parameter λ given this observation?
(d) (3 points) Consider the following function F (w) for scalar w:
F (w) = 2w2 +w4
Here is how it looks when you plot it:
(i) Is F a convex function (with respect to w)? (ii) Is it smooth (e.g. L-smooth for some
finite L > 0)? (iii) Briefly justify your answer. Any type of explanation is acceptable but
must be correct (e.g. geometrically or mathematically).
Summer 2026 3 of 4
Name:
(e) (2 points) Consider the 1D objective F (w) = 1
2w2. Suppose you run gradient descent with
a fixed step size η starting from w1 = 1. For step sizes η∈{ 0.1, 0.5, 2, 2.1}, classify the
iterate behavior: (i) converges to 0, (ii) oscillates with constant magnitude, or (iii) diverges
in magnitude.
(f) (2 points) For a high-dimensional dataset, you train ridge regression with three different
regularization values and observe:
• Run A: near-zero training error, very large ∥w∥2
• Run B: high training error, very small ∥w∥2
• Run C: moderate training error, moderate ∥w∥2
Order the runs in terms of regularization strength λ, from weakest to strongest.
(g) (2 points) Consider a scaled logistic loss
ℓβ(x,y ) = log

1 + exp

−βy w⊤x

, β > 0.
If we increaseβ, what happens to the loss on: (i) correctly classified points far from the bound-
ary (y w⊤x≫ 0), and (ii) confidently misclassified points far on the wrong side (y w⊤x≪ 0)?
Summer 2026 4 of 4
